pages/association.md, before:

---
title: 'Comunica Association'
description: 'Organization for ensuring the maintenance and development of the Comunica'
---

The Comunica Association is a **non-profit organization** for establishing a roadmap,
and ensuring the maintenance and development of the Comunica framework and its dependencies.

It **connects organizations** that are in **need of improvements or features**, to **developers** seeking funding.

<div class="docs-intro-img">
  <img src="/img/association_overview.svg" alt="Comunica Association Overview" style="width:75%" \>
</div>

The Association is currently in an **incubation phase**,
during which companies can place [**bounties on issues**](/association/bounties/),
and developers may work on them for an agreed upon price.

Additionally, you can also [**donate or become a member via Open Collective**](https://opencollective.com/comunica-association)
to receive benefits such as placing your logo on our website.
After this incubation phase, certain membership tiers will also give your organization or company access to the [board meetings](/association/board/) of the Comunica Association
which will allow you to help shape the long-term vision and roadmap of Comunica and the Association.

Feel free to [contact us](mailto:ruben.taelman@ugent.be) if you want to discuss alternative forms of support.

<div className="grid">
  <a href="/association/bounties/" className="card">
    <h3>List of bounties &rarr;</h3>
    <p>Express your interest to work on a feature or bug</p>
  </a>

  <a href="/association/bounty_process/" className="card">
    <h3>Bounty procedures &rarr;</h3>
    <p>Learn more about how bounties are placed and managed</p>
  </a>
  
  <a href="https://opencollective.com/comunica-association" className="card">
    <h3>Donate &rarr;</h3>
    <p>Sponsor via Open Collective</p>
  </a>
  
  <a href="/association/board/" className="card">
    <h3>Board of Directors &rarr;</h3>
    <p>Members can join board meetings</p>
  </a>
</div>

If you want to be notified about future developments around this association, submit your email address below!

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSe9sewt6jInvp8BnbjsudQqeCyTeEPE9PgGofq9AbxRLPIpag/viewform?embedded=true" width="100%" height="420" frameborder="0" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0" scrolling="no">Loading...</iframe>

The Comunica Association is an activity within [Open Knowledge Belgium](https://openknowledge.be/),
and our budget is visible on [Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/comunica-association).

Commit message:

Document issue prioritization for sponsors

pages/association.md, after:

---
title: 'Comunica Association'
description: 'Organization for ensuring the maintenance and development of the Comunica'
---

The Comunica Association is a **non-profit organization** for establishing a roadmap,
and ensuring the maintenance and development of the Comunica framework and its dependencies.

It **connects organizations** that are in **need of improvements or features**, to **developers** seeking funding.

<div class="docs-intro-img">
  <img src="/img/association_overview.svg" alt="Comunica Association Overview" style="width:75%" \>
</div>

The Association is currently in an **incubation phase**,
during which companies can place [**bounties on issues**](/association/bounties/),
and developers may work on them for an agreed upon price.

Additionally, you can also [**donate or become a sponsor via Open Collective**](https://opencollective.com/comunica-association)
to help fund development on the Comunica roadmap and get your issues prioritized (*).
The Board Member tier will give your organization or company access to the [board meetings](/association/board/) of the Comunica Association
which will allow you to help shape the long-term vision and roadmap of Comunica and the Association.

Feel free to [contact us](mailto:ruben.taelman@ugent.be) if you want to discuss alternative forms of support.

<div className="grid">
  <a href="/association/bounties/" className="card">
    <h3>List of bounties &rarr;</h3>
    <p>Express your interest to work on a feature or bug</p>
  </a>

  <a href="/association/bounty_process/" className="card">
    <h3>Bounty procedures &rarr;</h3>
    <p>Learn more about how bounties are placed and managed</p>
  </a>
  
  <a href="https://opencollective.com/comunica-association" className="card">
    <h3>Donate &rarr;</h3>
    <p>Sponsor via Open Collective</p>
  </a>
  
  <a href="/association/board/" className="card">
    <h3>Board of Directors &rarr;</h3>
    <p>Members can join board meetings</p>
  </a>
</div>

If you want to be notified about future developments around this association, submit your email address below!

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSe9sewt6jInvp8BnbjsudQqeCyTeEPE9PgGofq9AbxRLPIpag/viewform?embedded=true" width="100%" height="420" frameborder="0" marginheight="0" marginwidth="0" scrolling="no">Loading...</iframe>

The Comunica Association is an activity within [Open Knowledge Belgium](https://openknowledge.be/),
and our budget is visible on [Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/comunica-association).

<p className="bounty-page-footer">
  * Sponsors that want to have an issue prioritized should <a href="mailto:ruben.taelman@ugent.be">contact us</a>.
  The board will decide the final order of issue handling based on historical sponsorship contribution and developer availability.
</p>
