pages/association/board.md, before:

---
title: 'Board of Directors'
description: 'The board makes decisions regarding the Comunica Association'
---

The [Comunica Association](/association/) has a Board of Directors
that makes decisions with respect to the Comunica Association.
This page describes details on who are the members of this board, what it does, and how it works.

## Members

* [Ruben Taelman](https://www.rubensworks.net/) [(IDLab, Ghent University – imec)](https://knows.idlab.ugent.be/) - Codebase curator and maintainer
* [Pieter Colpaert](https://pietercolpaert.be/) [(IDLab, Ghent University – imec)](https://knows.idlab.ugent.be/) - Strategic coordinator
* [Jesse Wright](https://github.com/jeswr/) [(Australian National University)](https://cecs.anu.edu.au/) - Developer

## Goals

The Board of Directors makes decisions concerning the following topics:

* Determine long-term goals via the [roadmap](/roadmap/).
* Suggest priorities of issues to the maintainers for short-term development via the [project boards](https://github.com/orgs/comunica/projects).
* Coordinate future of the Comunica Association

Furthermore, board meetings can be used to evaluate the maintenance and development of Comunica and its related dependencies,
which includes development by externals via the [Bounty Program](/association/bounties/).

## Becoming a Board Member

There are two ways to become a Board Member:

1. Become a financial contributor via [Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/comunica-association) of the the Board Member tier
2. Become a regular [contributor](/contribute/) in any other way, with a dedication of at least four hours per week on average.

## Decision-making Process

At least once every year, the board virtually meets for a board meeting.
Not all members are required to be present at each meeting.
The chair is expected to prepare an agenda ahead of time,
which should contain points raised by the board members.
A meeting may be skipped if there are no objections from members.

The chair is appointed by the board members, and may be changed at any time through a decision.
The title of "codebase curator" is reserved for one person,
and can only be passed on to someone else by the current codebase curator.

Every decision must be represented by an issue on a (yet to be created) GitHub repository,
and describe a concrete action once the issue is accepted. 
During the meeting, such issues can be voted upon with either a 👍 (=1), 👎 (=-1), or a 👀 (=0),
and every member can place exactly one vote.
In case of a tie, the final decision is up to the chair.
The codebase curator may optionally overrule any (final) vote if this person considers this decision to be detrimental to the future of Comunica or the Comunica Association.
Non-attending members may raise their vote for up to two weeks after the meeting.
Once a vote is final, an action will be carried out by the executive contributors.

Minutes are scribed for each meeting by a volunteer,
and are to appear afterwards on the (yet to be created) GitHub repository.

Commit message:

Update Decision-making Process to reflect reality

pages/association/board.md, after:

---
title: 'Board of Directors'
description: 'The board makes decisions regarding the Comunica Association'
---

The [Comunica Association](/association/) has a Board of Directors
that makes decisions with respect to the Comunica Association.
This page describes details on who are the members of this board, what it does, and how it works.

## Members

* [Ruben Taelman](https://www.rubensworks.net/) [(IDLab, Ghent University – imec)](https://knows.idlab.ugent.be/) - Codebase curator and maintainer
* [Pieter Colpaert](https://pietercolpaert.be/) [(IDLab, Ghent University – imec)](https://knows.idlab.ugent.be/) - Strategic coordinator
* [Jesse Wright](https://github.com/jeswr/) [(Australian National University)](https://cecs.anu.edu.au/) - Developer

## Goals

The Board of Directors makes decisions concerning the following topics:

* Determine long-term goals via the [roadmap](/roadmap/).
* Suggest priorities of issues to the maintainers for short-term development via the [project boards](https://github.com/orgs/comunica/projects).
* Coordinate future of the Comunica Association

Furthermore, board meetings can be used to evaluate the maintenance and development of Comunica and its related dependencies,
which includes development by externals via the [Bounty Program](/association/bounties/).

## Becoming a Board Member

There are two ways to become a Board Member:

1. Become a financial contributor via [Open Collective](https://opencollective.com/comunica-association) of the the Board Member tier
2. Become a regular [contributor](/contribute/) in any other way, with a dedication of at least four hours per week on average.

## Decision-making Process

At least once every year, the board virtually meets for a board meeting.
Not all members are required to be present at each meeting.
The chair is expected to prepare an agenda ahead of time on https://github.com/comunica/association/blob/master/board-meetings/next.md,
which should contain points raised by the board members.
A meeting may be skipped if there are no objections from members.

The chair is appointed by the board members, and may be changed at any time through a decision.
The title of "codebase curator" is reserved for one person,
and can only be passed on to someone else by the current codebase curator.

During the meeting, decisions can be made,
and every member can place exactly one vote.
In case of a tie, the final decision is up to the chair.
The codebase curator may optionally overrule any (final) vote if this person considers this decision to be detrimental to the future of Comunica or the Comunica Association.
Non-attending members may raise their vote for up to two weeks after the meeting after reading the meeting minutes.
Once a vote is final, an action will be carried out by the executive contributors.

Minutes are scribed for each meeting by a volunteer,
and are to appear afterwards on https://github.com/comunica/association/tree/master/board-meetings
The minutes are sent to all board members shortly after each meeting.
