pages/association/bounty_process.md, before:

---
title: 'Bounty Procedures'
description: 'The process for handling bounties on issues'
---

This page explains how <span class="bounty-company">companies</span> can place bounties on issues,
how <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span> can work on them,
and how the <span class="bounty-assoc">[Comunica Association](/association/)</span> manages such bounties.

## Placing a bounty

<span class="bounty-company">Companies</span> (or other types of organizations) that are interested in placing bounties on issues (features requests, bug reports, ...) must follow this procedure:

1. <span class="bounty-company">Company</span> lets the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> know they are interested in placing a bounty on an issue, by <a href="mailto:ruben.taelman@ugent.be?subject=I want to place a bounty">mailing us</a>.
2. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> finds one or more suitable <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span>, and reports back to the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> on their expected time frame and cost.
3. All parties (<span class="bounty-assoc">association</span>, <span class="bounty-company">company</span>, <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span>) negotiate the final time frame and cost, after which one <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> is assigned to the issue (if all parties agree).
4. The <span class="bounty-company">company</span> pays the full bounty cost to the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span>, from which the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> claims an overhead of 15%.
5. After completion (or when the reserved time runs out), all parties (<span class="bounty-assoc">association</span>, <span class="bounty-company">company</span>, <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span>) evaluate the work.
6. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> pays the bounty to the developer (minus 15% overhead).

## Working on a bounty

<span class="bounty-dev">Developers</span> that are interested in working on issue bounties must follow this procedure:

1. Based on the [list of bounties](/association/bounties/), <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span> can click on any issue to notify the association that they are interested in working on this issue.
2. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> discusses with the developer to learn about previous experiences, and what the expected time frame and at what price the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> is willing to work for.
3. If the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> agrees with the <span class="bounty-dev">developer's</span> conditions, they jointly negotiate the final time frame and cost, after which the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> is assigned to the issue (if all parties agree), and the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> can start the work.
4. After completion (or when the reserved time runs out), the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> presents the work to the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> and the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> for evaluation.
5. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> pays the bounty to the developer (minus 15% overhead).

## Management of bounties

The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> manages issues as follows:

1. A <span class="bounty-company">company</span> sends a mail to the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> to place a bounty on one or more issues.
2. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> marks the issue with the `comunica-association-bounty` label, and adds a footer to the issue to mark that a bounty has been placed, after which the issue will appear automatically in [the list of bounties](/association/bounties/). Optionally, a budget for the bounty can be added.
3. If applicable, the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> directly contacts potentially interested developers.
4. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> awaits offers from <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span> with their estimated time frame and cost.
5. Depending on the urgency of the issue, the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> sends all offers from <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span> to the <span class="bounty-company">company</span>, together with any previous experiences the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> had with each <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span>.
6. The <span class="bounty-company">company</span> and <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> negotiate with at least one <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> to agree on a fixed time frame and cost (taking into account the 15% overhead).
7. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> sends an invoice to the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> for the agreed upon price.
8. After payment of the invoice, the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> can start with the work.
9. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> assigns the issue to the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span>, which will make the issue marked as *"claimed"* in [the list of bounties](/association/bounties/).
10. Once the deadline is reached, the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> contacts the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> and <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> to schedule a review meeting.
11. During the review meeting, all parties discuss the outcome, and potential next steps.
12. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> pays the bounty to the developer (minus 15% overhead).

Depending on the specific needs of certain issues or use cases, deviations from these procedures may take place.

Commit message:

Emphasize that devs should not start working on bounties too soon

pages/association/bounty_process.md, after:

---
title: 'Bounty Procedures'
description: 'The process for handling bounties on issues'
---

This page explains how <span class="bounty-company">companies</span> can place bounties on issues,
how <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span> can work on them,
and how the <span class="bounty-assoc">[Comunica Association](/association/)</span> manages such bounties.

## Placing a bounty

<span class="bounty-company">Companies</span> (or other types of organizations) that are interested in placing bounties on issues (features requests, bug reports, ...) must follow this procedure:

1. <span class="bounty-company">Company</span> lets the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> know they are interested in placing a bounty on an issue, by <a href="mailto:ruben.taelman@ugent.be?subject=I want to place a bounty">mailing us</a>.
2. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> finds one or more suitable <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span>, and reports back to the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> on their expected time frame and cost.
3. All parties (<span class="bounty-assoc">association</span>, <span class="bounty-company">company</span>, <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span>) negotiate the final time frame and cost, after which one <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> is assigned to the issue (if all parties agree).
4. The <span class="bounty-company">company</span> pays the full bounty cost to the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span>, from which the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> claims an overhead of 15%.
5. After completion (or when the reserved time runs out), all parties (<span class="bounty-assoc">association</span>, <span class="bounty-company">company</span>, <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span>) evaluate the work.
6. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> pays the bounty to the developer (minus 15% overhead).

## Working on a bounty

<span class="bounty-dev">Developers</span> that are interested in working on issue bounties must follow this procedure:

1. Based on the [list of bounties](/association/bounties/), <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span> can click on any issue to notify the association that they are interested in working on this issue.
2. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> discusses with the developer to learn about previous experiences, and what the expected time frame and at what price the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> is willing to work for.
3. If the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> agrees with the <span class="bounty-dev">developer's</span> conditions, they jointly negotiate the final time frame and cost, after which the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> is assigned to the issue (if all parties agree), and the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> can start the work.
4. After completion (or when the reserved time runs out), the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> presents the work to the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> and the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> for evaluation.
5. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> pays the bounty to the developer (minus 15% overhead).

**The developer should not start working on the issue, before the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> and <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> have confirmed the assignment.**

## Management of bounties

The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> manages issues as follows:

1. A <span class="bounty-company">company</span> sends a mail to the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> to place a bounty on one or more issues.
2. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> marks the issue with the `comunica-association-bounty` label, and adds a footer to the issue to mark that a bounty has been placed, after which the issue will appear automatically in [the list of bounties](/association/bounties/). Optionally, a budget for the bounty can be added.
3. If applicable, the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> directly contacts potentially interested developers.
4. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> awaits offers from <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span> with their estimated time frame and cost.
5. Depending on the urgency of the issue, the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> sends all offers from <span class="bounty-dev">developers</span> to the <span class="bounty-company">company</span>, together with any previous experiences the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> had with each <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span>.
6. The <span class="bounty-company">company</span> and <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> negotiate with at least one <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> to agree on a fixed time frame and cost (taking into account the 15% overhead).
7. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> sends an invoice to the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> for the agreed upon price.
8. After payment of the invoice, the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> can start with the work.
9. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> assigns the issue to the <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span>, which will make the issue marked as *"claimed"* in [the list of bounties](/association/bounties/).
10. Once the deadline is reached, the <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> contacts the <span class="bounty-company">company</span> and <span class="bounty-dev">developer</span> to schedule a review meeting.
11. During the review meeting, all parties discuss the outcome, and potential next steps.
12. The <span class="bounty-assoc">association</span> pays the bounty to the developer (minus 15% overhead).

Depending on the specific needs of certain issues or use cases, deviations from these procedures may take place.
